Okay, we're rolling. First of all, I just wondered if you might tell us a little
bit about how you, the origin of the column in Locus that you write. Well, about
two and a half years ago, I was invited to address a group of authors, the
American Society of Journalists and Authors. And I chose to talk to them about
certain contractual clauses that I thought might be pitfalls in most
professional authors. In the questioning that followed, I found an appalling
ignorance on the part of authors on the subject of contracts. Many of these
people are highly respected professional journalists and book authors, and yet
it was clear to me that they didn't know anything, or very much I should say,
about how to read a contract, how to negotiate one, and how to alter a clause to
their own benefit. And so I decided to write a column for the many other writers
who probably are in the same position. And I asked Charles Brown, the editor of
Locus, a publisher of Locus, I guess, whether he'd be interested in publishing
it. And it was quite agreeable. And thereafter, a number of magazines,
newsletters published by other writers' groups such as Western Writers of
America, Romance Writers of America, Mystery Writers of America, took on the
column because they felt their authors were in the same position. So actually,
Locust, then, was your first magazine of that type that you wrote the column
for? Yes, Locust was, I still consider myself as writing the column for Locust.
Okay, fine. Would you be allowed to tell me which science fiction authors, or
just some of them that you do represent? Well, no, I don't mind at all. I think
it's fairly common knowledge in the science fiction community. We represent
Harlan Ellison, Gregory Benford, Greg Baer, Elizabeth Lin. Marta Randall, Barry
Longyear, Warren Norwood,
Jessica Salmondson, and I'd say three or four more. Okay. If you had to sell a
decent manuscript by an unknown author, would you prefer to work with a romance,
a western, a mystery, a science fiction, what sort of genre of literature? Well,
my orientation has always been the paperback original market. Not that my agency
doesn't handle hardcovers. We handle quite a lot of them, dozens and dozens of
hardcovers, and many have been on the bestseller list and book club selections
and so forth. But the really blood of the industry is the paperback market, And
the paperback market does break down into some fairly convenient genres. And
agents, I guess, are a little bit like nomads in that they follow the source of
life. And in this case, for instance, the hot market right now is the
contemporary romances. And so we have a very active department in contemporary
romances. because science fiction has become somewhat soft since the Star Wars
phenomenon. Although it's still a very active market, we have noticed a kind of
sorting out of important writers from what they call the mid-list writers. That
is to say, those writers who aren't quite of the rockbuster or bestseller
category, and yet they're better than what some people might refer to as, you
know, as Act Writers. They find themselves in a market where there really isn't
an audience anymore. So we have found that writers really have to choose between
going to something else or becoming stars in the science fiction market. There's
no middle ground anymore, and that's true of just about all the genres. because
Westerns, romance may be the place that is most open for new writers,
inexperienced writers. But in the science fiction world, I think you must start
with some advantage or you're going to have a tough struggle ahead of you. I
think we've never spoken to an agent before, and there's always, from your
perspective, I think you can answer certain questions that I think anybody else
would have difficulty answering. And one of them I wanted to ask you is from
your perspective, what determines the popularity of a genre of literature in
paperback? Is it the publishers who create the taste, or what causes? It's hard
to say. Sometimes it's the publishers create the taste, and sometimes the
market, the consumer, creates the demand. And sometimes it's the agent. For
instance, I find myself very often in speaking to publishers, I find myself in a
double role. I keep my ears open and try to listen to what a publisher tells me
about what he's able to sell and what he's not able to sell. And so I have a
kind of passive role in that I pass along to authors what the publishers tell me
the market is doing. However, if I begin to notice a trend, I then try to help
create a market by turning to other publishers and saying, listen, I've had
lunch the last couple of months with four publishers, and they all tell me that
hard science fiction is not as active as fantasy and sword and sorcery, and so
maybe you'd be interested in some sword and sorcery. So an agent is in the
position of shaping the market once it begins to detect the trend.
Okay, that was interesting. I guess after reading your columns, of course, I'm
coming to understand how much influence an agent can have. I don't think I
realized that before.
Okay, I think I know the answer to this. In fact, most of the questions I'm
asking you, I have some idea of what you'll say because of what I've read of
your work, but I still need to ask it. But I know that you have different
contracts for different clients or different authors, but say a contract was any
sort of author, not just science fiction, is it dependent upon if an author is
new or established according to what kind of contract he gets? Well, I think
authors and agents probably ought to try to penetrate through a lot of the haze
that surrounds contractual negotiations and realize that the essential in a
contractual negotiation is who has the power. For the beginning author, the
first author, or the author of some work from minor markets, the power
definitely rests with the publisher. The author, in effect, is saying to the
publisher, I will sign anything you hand me if you publish me. And the publisher
says, well, I'm glad to hear that, because if you don't like our terms, we'll
find somebody else to write for us. Now, obviously, the power in that equation
lies with the publisher. However, as an author begins to develop, he has a
following. His books begin to sell. The prices that he gets for his work begin
to escalate. He may have a bestseller. He now has other publishers interested in
publishing him, and now the equation is on the other foot, if I may mix a
metaphor. And it's now the publisher says, I will do anything to keep you, and
the author says, well, then you'd better meet my terms because there are plenty
of publishers out there who will publish me if you don't like what I have, the
terms that I'm ready to dictate. So when you get down to this raw power, and the
agent tries to put himself in those tower vectors, I guess you would say, and
get some sense of where they converge, and that's the point at which a contract
materializes. The contract is a direct reflection of the power flow between the
two parties, and at the point where they all interface, that is what a contract
reads. That's excellent. Very good. You talk just like you write, I think. I'm
not sure that's good or bad. Listen, science fiction fans are, I think, more
fanatic than other types, and a lot of them, of course, are interested in
writing and doing something besides just reading it. If somebody had a
reasonable amount of talent, what would you advise an aspiring science fiction
author? Where should you begin? Always begin with the magazines. You're
absolutely right about science fiction fans being more fanatic, But they are
also fortunate in having a place where they can begin in the shorter media,
where most writers in other genres don't have the chance. I mean, there are very
few places where a romance writer can can tease, you know, you know, you can't
write romance short stories unless you write for try to write for some of the
slicker women's magazines. and they're of course very demanding in what they
accept. There used to be Western magazines, many, many of them, but those,
almost all of them, are gone now. Mystery magazines were still a couple of them,
but it's not like what it used to be when I got into the business about 25 years
ago. So one of the few remaining genres that invites new talent and cultivates
it is science fiction, where you have a very active magazine market and
anthology market for original stories. You also have conventions. Of course,
Western writers, romance writers, mystery writers also have their conventions.
But certainly, science fiction writers can out-convention anybody by a ratio of
10 to 1. So there's a lot of interplay
where authors are always talking to one another, meeting editors, meeting
professional writers, and there's a much tighter unity than there is in any
other genre. So I would definitely advise any aspiring science fiction writer to
start writing in the magazines. In fact, even some of my well-known clients, I
still tell them to continue writing for science fiction magazines even though
they may get peanuts for their work compared to what they can get writing books,
because the exposure among both science fiction editors and science fiction fans
is terribly important.
Okay, I just have about one or two more on science fiction and I'll get on to
some more general things. Would you happen to be working with any unpublished
authors at present in science fiction that we might look for? That question kind
of catches me unaware. We have a number of people that we're, you know, we are
establishing. It's very hard to say because in spite of what I said a few
moments ago about getting published in magazines, like most other agents, we
handle very little by way of short fiction. It's not profitable for an agent to
handle science fiction stories. And there's very little that we can do for a
short story writer that he or she can't do for him or herself. so by the time an
author comes to us asking for representation and we think that person might be
interesting he's probably had quite a number of stories published in the science
fiction magazines I will mention one one author that I think is enormously
talented and will probably burst on the scenes within the next couple of years.
And that's a writer named Dan Simmons, who's beginning to make some appearances
in Omni and some of the other magazines. He's a very, very talented writer. And
we are about to take on some of his longer work.
Okay, one more answer. I should accord my thanks to Harlan Ellison, who was the
first person to spot him and refer him to me. Okay, good. One more on science
fiction. Are you working on selling or do you have in your hands any big
manuscripts from some of your name authors that might be published in the near
future? Well, Gregory Benford, the author of Timescape, which was the Nebula
Award winner in the novel category for 1981, One has two novels coming out in
the next year. One is Against Infinity, which is coming out in April. Will be
published by Timescape Books and Hardcover, a wonderful novel. And I believe
next February, we will see In the Ocean of... excuse me, Across the Sea of Suns,
which is the sequel to In the Ocean of Night and is the second novel in a
trilogy. We also have what I consider a great novel in the making by Richard
Grant, who's made some appearances in magazines but turned in a spectacular
novel, which is now being shaped somewhat and redone but it's some of the most
brilliant writing I've ever read and those who have had an early look at it
agree with me that it's a very impressive job and I know that when that book is
finished I believe it's got bestseller written all over it Do you like
trilogies? Yes I like them and I encourage them. I feel they're a very
comfortable
form for science fiction writers. In fact, you know, for non-science fiction
writers as well. The beauty
of a trilogy, of course, from an ancient viewpoint is in the kind of package
deal that one can make where you not only sign an author up for a book, but you
can sign him up for a sequel and a sequel after that. And the author knows where
he's going to be two years from now. The publisher knows what he can expect over
a couple of years. And unless the author one day runs out of steam or gets bored
with characters that he developed in book one or two, you can see a cumulative
effect in the sales of a trilogy where publication of book two makes people
scurry for book one, and publication of book three causes the publisher to
reissue books one and two, and then they put them in a box set, and they're
reviewed as a whole. It's a very nice way of publishing books, but not everybody
has a sequel in them. right why does an author with reasonable talent need an
agent um there are there are very few uh authors who once they achieve
publication are really able or even want to handle their own business until you
become a full-blooded professional writer with a track record. As I said before,
most of your job is writing your magazine stuff, sending it out, and developing
a magazine market. But once you begin selling, unless you really understand
contractual language,
then you're going to need an agent to interpret it for you. But also, most
authors are not as objective about their work as an agent can be. And therefore,
they either demand too much or too little when they negotiate a contract. So an
agent can help put things in perspective and can talk both publishers and
authors into being reasonable. Agents can also exploit subsidiary rights that
authors are only dimly aware of. And agents finally are able to help build an
author's career by spotting that author's strengths and weaknesses and building,
of course, on the strengths and developing their talents to the utmost. There
are a few authors I know, most notably Isaac Asimov, who I don't believe have
agents or at least not regular agents. And Isaac certainly has done okay for
himself, although I think there are probably five dozen agents who have said to
him, think how well you would have done if you'd had an agent. But most authors
sooner or later feel that it is well worth the commission and other things to
have somebody, particularly when you're not, when you don't live in the New York
area where, which is the heart of the publishing world. You live in California
or Nebraska or something like that. There's nothing so frightening as to be out
of touch with a publisher and not having anybody that you can call to act on
your behalf. Okay, a more personal question. your book How to Be Your Own
Literary Agent of course I haven't seen that yet but are you trying to put
yourself out of business with that I don't think I will for the reasons that I
just told you the title may not be exactly accurate because although it is
designed to help new authors get a foot in the door that they might not
otherwise have It's also aimed at the professional author who may have an agent
who may be of the kind who simply signs on the dotted line when his agent sticks
a contract under his nose. And those authors, I think, are usually the ones who
end up discovering a couple of years down the road that they made a horrible
mistake when they signed that contract. And why didn't their agent tell them
about certain things. And so my feeling is that an enlightened author is
probably an agent's best friend, whether he's represented by an agent or not.
The more than an author knows about contracts and related subjects, the tougher
he's going to be in dealing with publishers and the more he's going to benefit
the entire fraternity fraternity and sorority of authors in this country and
make an agent's job easier. So I don't feel that I've contradicted myself by
publishing a book called How to Be Your Own Literary Agent. Okay, as the title
indicates then, that really is a how-to book. Well, it does tell you, for
instance, if you're a new author, it tells you what genres are the likeliest
ones to buy your work, how to write for them, how to package your work for them,
how to get your work on the desk of an editor and avoid the so-called slush
pile. It tells you what to do if you should get an offer. It tells you how to
negotiate on your own. It tells you how to oversee what your agent is doing if
you should decide to turn your work over to an agent. It tells you how to hire
and fire an agent. And it completely analyzes publishing contracts from start to
finish and interprets each clause in a way that any author can certainly get an
advantage by studying my suggestions.
So really, I guess even the beginner would get some good out of the book.
Absolutely. Okay, good. And when will I be out again? Let's see, today is the
15th. Three days is the official publication date. February 18th. Okay, very
good. It's already created something of a controversy in New York because one of
the chapters in the book is a somewhat outspoken attack on publishing accounting
systems. Printing. Publishers have a tendency to do what I call creative
accounting, which the bottom line is that they hold, hide, or misguide authors
as to how much in royalties they're entitled to. And a couple of days ago, the
New York Times picked up on that chapter and published an article under the
headline, Agent Says Publishers Are Cheating Authors. So we've got what I
consider very healthy controversy going and certainly one that every author
ought to be interested in because it really is the gut issue. I know many new
authors and aspiring authors. All they want to know is who's going to publish my
book and whatever they pay me, whatever advance I get is fine with me. But as
they become more and more professional and experienced, they may wake up one day
and realize that they're not getting everything that's owing to them because the
publishers have obscured some of the royalty reporting systems that would enable
an author to get his full due. And so I've tried to dispel some of the mystery
around the reading of royalty statements so publishers, so authors can get a
better idea of what is being told to them and whether any money is being hidden.
Okay, in reading your columns over a period of time, I think I've caught you
saying a couple times that even with a lot of talent and even with a great
manuscript, writers still may not make it because of the way the publishing
industry is set up. Is that sort of a cynical attitude on your part? Well, I
don't say it with any pride. I say it with a great deal of sadness.
In the last couple of years, the prices of books have gone prohibitively high. a
hardcover novel these days sells for anywhere from $15 to $20 and a paperback
novel sells anywhere from $3 to $5 or even a little more and the consumer, the
book buyer, is shying away from the marketplace now because he seems to feel
there are better ways to spend $20 or $5 even As a result, the book sales have
been dropping, and the publishers have become more and more selective as to what
they buy. Unfortunately, that all gets passed down to the author. And more and
more frequently in the last couple of years, I have had to turn away, as all my
colleagues in the agency business have had to do, So I've had to turn away a
number of very good books that were well-written, but didn't really fit into
certain categories that I know are actively buying. And so what you end up with
is a well-written book that really isn't saleable. And, you know, it can often
break your heart to send a book like that back. It doesn't hurt you as much to
send back a bad book as it does to send back a good one, but there's nothing
guaranteeing that a good book is going to sell, and that, I would say, is
possibly the major difference between publishing today and publishing ten years
ago. Okay, one more follow-up on that. Does the system, as you describe it, lead
to sort of hack writing, or writing that's not very good? No, quite the
contrary. I think the level of writing is getting better because publishers
don't need to publish hack writing anymore when they can get so many good
writers. The market has shrunk. For instance, in the paperback field, whereas
about two or three years ago, there were, I would say, 13 active, viable
paperbacks, ranging from the modest-sized ones to the giant. several have gone
out of business, and three or four more have been absorbed into other companies,
and now one can count six or seven paperback publishers left. And so the clamor
to be published by those houses is increasing, and so the publishers can afford
to be more selective than ever before. So my feeling is that, although I don't
like to use the word hack, that certainly the inferior writer is either going to
have to try harder or he's going to drop out because there are just too many
good writers waiting to take his place. Okay, Mr. Curtis, I have about 10
minutes left, if you can spare that. I wanted to talk about some personal things
about your background and your own work, if you have the time for that.
Absolutely.
Okay, I was going to say, how does one become an agent? but I guess I better ask
how you became one. Well, I think for a long time I always wanted to be a
writer. And when I got out of college, I discovered that there were no real jobs
for writers, so I decided to get into a related field, publishing. Could not
find a job at a publishing company, so I finally ended up working for a leading
literary agency, Scott Meritor. And there I stayed for some seven or eight
years, and that was my apprenticeship. And after some seven years, I really did
have an itch to write. And so I had been writing even while I worked for Scott
Merritt. So I left that firm and became a freelance writer. And of course,
having been an agent, I was much better connected than most freelance writers
could ever hope to be. So the transition was not as hard for me as it would be
if somebody left some other job. I did a lot of magazine work, but eventually
realized that the magazine market was in its twilight and began focusing on
books. I wrote a lot of paperback novels and then eventually got into such areas
as collaboration. books on conservation. I found that I had a forte in the area
of humor, so I did a number of satirical books. I wrote just about anything that
people would pay money for, and it was a very, very good grounding. And after
about five years of that, a number of my old clients looked me up and asked me
if I would represent them. And since I was not making a fortune as a writer in
spite of the fact that, to date, I've had about 45 books published, I decided
that perhaps I would go back into agenting, and I started my own firm. And for
two or three years, I was both a writer and a literary agent, and literally I
had two desks back-to-back with a swivel chair between them, and in the morning
I would do one thing, and in the afternoon I would do another, and I would try
not to let one contaminate the other. And eventually, when I discovered that I
could make more money on a few phone calls as an agent than I could for four or
five months writing books, it was pretty clear to me where my career was
heading. But I have not given up my writing. The column, of course, is very
satisfying, and from time to time, I might take a crack at a commercial novel or
a nonfiction book. I get up at five or six in the morning. I'll write for an
hour or so. Then I'll go to work. Although an hour a day may not seem like a
lot, as most professional writers will tell you, over a period of a couple of
months, one can write a book at an hour a day as long as you stay with it and
turn out something every day. So I do consider myself a literary agent with a
side order of writing.
In looking over the books that I know you've written in the past few years, it
seems to me that a lot of your nonfiction books have been dealing with issues of
social concern, like the nuclear lessons, the inequality in American
communities, and so forth. Is that because of personal taste or because of your
collaborator? Well, I take some pride in some of the work that I've done in the
area of conservation.
Around 1970 or so, I was approached by a woman who had accumulated a great deal
of quite terrifying information about the nuclear power industry, and she asked
me to collaborate with her. I knew very little about it, but I did work with
her, and out of that collaboration came a book that was published by Doubleday
called Perils of the Peaceful Atom. It was the first popular book on the dangers
of nuclear power plants, and although it was supplanted later on by books
published by people, authorities, scientists, and PhDs, whereas we were only
laymen and women, I like to think that that book did open the door to discussion
of the nuclear power issues, which finally culminated in the Three Mile Island
accident years later. And I was able to say that I had told you so. Many of the
things that happened were predicted in that book years earlier, and of course
nobody really wanted to listen. I have written some other books of social value
and I'm very proud of them I'm also, if I may add very proud as an agent to have
brought into the world many books on social issues and things like that we
recently handled a magnificent first novel about the Vietnam War called the 13th
Valley, which went on the bestseller list, and opened the door to what I know
will now be a state of Vietnam fiction. Up until that time, people had said that
nobody really wanted to read about Vietnam. And so we've now enabled some fresh
air to blow into the marketplace with that novel. And again, this is an
accomplishment that I'm very proud of.
What about your fiction, your novels? Could you give me an idea of what kind of
things you write about and if they sell well? Well, a couple of years ago, while
I was still full, well more than that, about a decade ago,
I conceived a paperback series featuring a hero that I always thought was rather
unusual. He was a detective in the area of sports. And a series of books
featuring this hero, the series was called The Pro. And the books were published
by Warner. We did four of those, and at the moment I'm trying to revive that
series or something along those lines because right now, although there's a
great deal of male action adventure fiction being published, everybody's getting
bored with the same old heroes, the mercenaries, the dirty dozens, and series
like that. and so I'm trying to get revived the hero that I think is a rather
refreshing one but I'm not able to do too much in the fiction area simply
because of time
Okay, I just have a couple more here I remember reading one of your columns
where you mentioned I guess it was an innovation on your part as an agent where
you contracted with a publicity firm for your clients and so forth I wondered if
things like that that you've done for your clients might be a little different
or innovative or whatever. Well, every agent, of course, is trying to seek a
better way to handle his clients and more advantages for his clients. One of the
things that upsets me deeply is the fact that publishers are very reluctant to
spend promotional money on any authors except the big-name celebrity authors. um
and so i attempted a couple of years ago um to rectify that by asking my clients
uh in effect to chip in uh each one of them would be in effect taxed a couple of
extra percentage points of commission. And that tax would go towards a fund
which we used to hire a publicity agent who would publicize the little guy. And
some of the campaigns were quite successful. Some aspects of the campaign were
not so successful. And it was because of the inconsistency of the results that
we finally dropped the program. but some of it has had lasting results and it
certainly created a lot of talk in the industry and among authors. And it was, I
thought, a noble experiment in the area of getting the lesser-known authors
publicized, but it's still difficult. The market inclines towards the big name,
and the struggle to become a big name is extremely intense, and very, very few
people emerge.
Okay, what about movie deals for books that are worthy of it? Do you actively
seek them out, or do movie houses come to you? Well, it's a combination. When
most books that are published that are of any value at all are covered by the
movie studios, producers, and the people in New York whose job it is to scout on
behalf of various Hollywood interests. So the chances are that if an agent is
handling a good book at all, it will have been seen in one way or another by
producers, directors, studio people, and so forth. They have amazing ways of
getting hold of manuscripts, no matter how secretive you try to be. And so long
before you're ready to show them, they've already been exposed. But
nevertheless, if we get a hot manuscript and we really think it's going to make
a terrific book, we actively try to find a movie producer for it. And sometimes
the deals come to us and sometimes we generate them.
Okay. That's about, I mean, there's lots of questions. I could keep on talking
for a long time, but I think we have enough and we've taken enough of your time.
but listen is there anything anything I haven't asked that you think listeners
should know or anything at all you'd like to talk about we still have some tape
left
no I'd be happy to answer any you know any other questions you may have I will
say that we were talking about innovations before I may be springing a very
radical proposition on the publishing industry that I believe will create a lot
of talk and controversy, and I'm not doing it just to publicize myself, but I've
begun to, because of my deep concern about royalty accounting and how publishers
have managed to manipulate and hide authors' royalties, I'm going to be making a
proposal to the publishing industry about a radically different way of
accounting royalties based not on sales but on copies printed. And I would say
that within the next few months, you might begin looking for some stirring in
that area. And I believe it could have some rather radical effects on the way
people think about the traditional way of accounting royalties. I remember some
of your columns, I think you sort of hinted at certain things about the way the
publishers did that. Right. Well, I actually do suggest something like it in my
book, but I will now be amplifying on it. And if I can get some of the
publishing media to pick up on these suggestions, it should make for a very,
very lively dialogue, and certainly one that's well overdue in this 18th century
business we call publishing. Well, I'd take it then in the three-part
relationship here, a writer, an agent, and a publisher that you would say
probably the publisher has much the best of it? No, I don't think so at all.
I've heard everybody accuse everybody else of having the best of it. There are
rich agents, there are agents who are struggling, there are rich authors and
authors who are struggling, and there are rich publishers and publishers who are
struggling. I, in spite of some of the belligerent things I may have said, i
have a great great many friends among the publishers and i want to see them do
well and so i've come to think of it as a symbiotic environment in which
everybody really does depend on everybody else and an agent's job is not just to
negotiate contracts but to negotiate interest so that nobody gets so badly hurt
that he can't carry on. I mean, publishers are always complaining about their
overhead, and it's well to remind them that agents have to pay their rent also.
But some agents get very greedy and they feel that the only way for an author to
become famous is to pin the publisher to the wall with a cruel deal. And
sometimes that can backfire in terms of how much money is left after you've hit
a publisher that hard, how much money is left for the struggling author. The
paperback publisher that consistently pays two or three million for one or two
authors is going to find himself neglecting the new author because he can't
afford to pay him, or if he should buy a new author's work, he won't have any
money left to publicize or promote that author's book. So there's something even
to be said for not being greedy on behalf of your authors and giving the
publisher an even break.